My name is David Khourshid, and I'm really
excited to be giving this workshop state
modelling with XState in React, basically
using XState in real-world applications.
This is the second XState course.
I highly recommend you watch
the first one as well, but
we're gonna be covering some stuff
from the first one in the second one.
The main purpose of this workshop is we're
going to be investigating how we could
use XState and just generally the idea of
software modeling with state machines and
state charts in real-world apps.
And we're gonna be doing that
by working on a real-world app,
which should be available
at this GitHub repo.
It's at github.com/davidkpiano/frontend
masters react workshop,
well, frontend-masters-react-workshop.
This is essentially
a Create React App app.
It's using the newest version
of Create Ract App, so
you don't have to worry about that.
And the installation process should be
the exact same as Create React App itself.
You would run either npm install or
yarn install if you're using Yarn, and
then you run yarn start to
actually start the app.
At any time, if you have questions,
feel free to chime in in the chat.
This workshop is for
you and it's about you.
So I want to help you out with
any of your real-world React or
whatever else you're using with XState.
Or even if you're not using XState yet and
you want to just see the advantages of
using state machines and state charts.
And it's just this strict declarative
modeling in your frontend apps,
please feel free to ask any questions and
I'll be more than happy to answer them.
So also a note, this is using
the latest version of XState,
which is XState 4.14, I believe.
In fact, I just released
a minor version yesterday, but
don't worry,
everything is basically the same.
And speaking of the same, by the end
of the year, this year being 2020,
the fifth version of XState will hopefully
be at least in beta or release candidate.
I want to let you know that everything you
learn in this course will be applicable to
XState version 5.
The main API is not changing,
at least not much.
Version 4 code will largely
be compatible with version 5.
The biggest changes are going to
be just around, well, actually,
they're not really big changes.
It's just more about
simplification of the API and
also how things work to make
XState more SCXML-compatible.
If you're not familiar with what SCXML is,
you go to w3.org/,
well, actually let me just
search it cuz I don't have
the exact URL memorized,
but w3.org/TR/scxml.
And it stands for state chart XML.
And this is basically the giant
spec that XState follows.
This is a specification which
is a W3C recommendation.
So it's pretty much as
official as it gets.
And it's just this way of defining
state machines and state charts in XML.
Obviously, XState doesn't use XML, but
it follows this spec pretty closely.
SCXML is, of course,
based on state charts by David Harrel,
which was created in 1989.
So all of these ideas are basically
more than 30 years old.
So if you want to dive deep
into how XState works,
I do recommend reading the spec.
It is a very long spec.
But basically, if you have the free time,
you're going to notice a lot
of similarities between what the spec
says and the API of XState, and
that's because XState
does follow the spec.
In other words,
XState tries to stick to old and
established ideas such as state machine,
state charts, and this SCXML spec.
And it doesn't try to invent anything new.
And you're gonna see that as a pretty
prominent theme throughout today.
Nothing we're doing is new at all.
And that's one of the beauties about
using state machines and state charts for
software modeling.
Okay, so
let's dive right into the code base.
Hopefully, you clones the repository,
which you could do so here in GitHub.
You click Code, clone this gitclone.url
and save it to your local system.
And so let's take a look at the code.
The way that this is broken up is once
you run yarn install and yarn start or
npm install and npm start, just gonna
do yarn start over here to show you.
This is going to run a local server
that hosts this app on localhost 3000.
And so this is what you should
see when the app loads.
You're gonna see Frontend Masters React
and XState Workshop,
as well as a bunch of exercises over here.
Now, this main screen is also one
that you could use as a scratchpad.
And you'll notice that we have some code
over here that we're going to be playing
around with during each of the lessons
just to demonstrate each of
the concepts here.
Nothing works here yet, but we'll change
that as we go through each of the lessons.
To do an exercise,
you just click on the exercise link and
you'll see it changes the link
up here in the URL too.
So this is Exercise
00-Creating a state machine.
And so the goals in the exercise are going
to be outlined on the left-hand side.
Now if you want to see the final version
or basically the answer sheet for
each of the exercises, those are located
in the files that have .final.js.
So in this case, for exercise 00,
you'll see Timer.final.js and
timerMachine.final.js.
Since this is a learning experience,
I don't really expect you to struggle
too hard with the exercises.
If you get stuck, please take
a look at the .final.js files and
see if your way of thinking was correct or
maybe you had to change
a couple of things.
In order to see this final machine,
what you could do is in the workshop file,
change the imported timer
from /Timer to /Timer.final.
And what you'll see is, for
example, exercise 00 solution.
And you'll see how things are basically
supposed to look when you're done with
the exercise.
So that's how the exercises
are going to work.
Throughout this course of the workshop,
we're basically working our way
towards building a complete timer app.
And so you could see that
when you go to /complete,
this is what we're ultimately building.
It's a timer app,
which if you have an Android device,
this is going to be pretty, pretty similar
to the timer app in the Android device.
You could enter a time here, press Enter.
This is a timer that you could pause and
play and add a minute to.
And you're also going to be able
to add multiple timers as well and
see all of them running at the same time.
So that's the goal of the workshop.
And yeah, we're gonna be talking
about basically how to use XState and
React and state machines and
state charts to build this app and
learn how to use state
machines in the real world.